Selecting the Car of the Year is far from a simple task.

Selecting the Car of the Year is far from a simple task. The rigorous examination process involves a cadre of dedicated staffers, several top-secret test venues, and a big stack of gasoline cards waiting to be run up to their limits. In addition to generating reams of empirical data on acceleration, braking, and handling performance, we micro-inspect every aspect of the vehicles’ inner and outer limits-opening, closing, entering, exiting, sitting, reclining, loading, unloading, feeling, touching, looking, listening, probing, and prodding. From the overall design theorem to the details of the finished product, each car is evaluated with an eye toward just how well it performs oits intended task.

We considered every all-new or substantially changed ’95 EPA-domestic car and minivan that will be on sale by Jan. 1, 1995, looking for the most significant vehicle in the market. Viewed from both an industry and buyer’s perspective, we weighed technological advancement, value, and performance. After all the data were analyzed, and the heated debates put to rest, one new car stood above the crowd. Perhaps surprisingly, the winner wasn’t the fastest, best handling, or even the lowest-priced vehicle in the mix. But the accolades roared nonetheless. On the merit of its superb design, top-notch quality, and outstanding value, we enthusiastically proclaim the Chrysler Cirrus Motor Trend’s 1995 Car of the Year.

Chrysler‘s Renaissance
One automobile does not a renaissance make, but Chrysler Corporation is in the midst of a styling and engineering rebirth that would make the Medicis blush. The all-new Chrysler Cirrus is not only a breakthrough American sedan in its own right, but the latest in a series of corporate home runs that includes the Dodge and Plymouth Neon small cars, the formidable Ram pickup (MT ’94 Truck of the Year), the wildly popular LH-series sedans, and, of course, the hormone-engorged Dodge Viper V-10 supercar.

As impressive as the Cirrus is in its finished form, the development “story behind the story” is just as intriguing. As the keystone of Chrysler’s newfound mission, its lean and mean “team concept” platform development program doesn’t merely replace a model of car with a fresh-faced version, but literally reinvents what that type of vehicle should be for today’s world. Advanced design and manufacturing concepts bring to bear all-electronic engineering methods and resources heretofore the province of aerospace companies. Attention to detail is evident throughout, which, in part, is the result of using select squads of parts suppliers integrated from the onset into the computer-based development team. That integration helped make Chrysler Corporation an efficient manufacturing machine.

As a low-cost producer of domestic products, Chrysler is now a company that thinks globally and acts locally. It took a world-class view of the Cirrus, imbuing the small sedan with the best ideas and technologies to be found-whether they came from Chrysler’s own labs or from outside suppliers. Such an allied spirit of cooperation infused the Cirrus’ JA-platform development group with a take-no-prisoners approach to doing battle in the hotly contested compact-sedan class. From Nissan‘s hot-selling Altima to Ford‘s new Contour, the Cirrus is ready to compete. Perhaps even more impressive is Cirrus’ “class ahead” strategy that targets Ford Taurus and Honda Accord shoppers, even though both those cars are positioned in the larger EPA mid-size class of sedans.

In the following pages, we’ll explore how that far-reaching goal was achieved.

Heads In The Clouds
Steve Bartoli is the product planning manager for the JA platform, and a part of the Large-Car Engineering group whose superboss is veteran Chrysler engineering spearhead Glenn Gardner. Shake hands with this enthusiastic car-guy and prepare to be impressed, as the former czar of Diamond-Star Motors engages you in the story of the ’95 Chrysler Cirrus.

The tableau of Cirrus history unfurls to reveal that Bartoli and colleagues were already hard at work on the JA-platform car when the larger LH sedans (Chrysler LHS, New Yorker, and Concorde, Dodge Intrepid and Eagle Vision) were introduced to the public. And it’s little wonder that the JA’s designers looked closely at every aspect of their corporate relation. Exquisite use of the now-famous cab-forward body design is only one feature of the LH cars utilized by the JA team. This smart attribute, along with others culled from myriad sources, has benefitted the Cirrus in innumerable ways.

Chrysler formed an ad hoc “product excellence team” that worked to identify the best features of the world’s finest cars. Once those items were selected, the engineers strived to include them in the Cirrus’ design. During around-the-clock driving tests, the team evaluated 23 competing cars within the segment and analyzed nearly 300 items that customers see, touch, and hear each time they drive a vehicle. Many of those items could’ve been discerned by common sense, such as the location and feel of power window switches, shift-knob shape, and the accessibility of the cupholders. Others, however, are less obvious, including the opening angle of the glovebox door, the tone and volume of the keyless-entry signal, and even the weight of the ignition key. Over three years of intense investigation, the scrutineers, headed by interior development engineer Suzanne Hoffman, refined these 300 elements into the Cirrus. It was Chrysler’s goal to deliver 110 percent of customers’ expectations.

Remember The Golden Rule
The seasoned maxim “time is money” is truly the golden rule of auto manufacturing. The Cirrus development engineers learned this truth well by improving on the LH program’s time-smart work habits. In fact, a Chrysler executive told us he believes a full six months was trimmed from the JA’s development schedule just by utilizing swifter (read: smarter) decision-making processes. The JA group integrated everyone involved in development by setting up the CATIA (Computer Aided Three-dimensional Interactive Application) system of computer-aided design. Boeing designed and prototyped its new 777 airliner in the same manner: electronically and virtually without paper.

“As an information base, CATIA has enabled us to communicate everything we do with everyone involved,” said large-car platform exec Mike Fieramosca. Far from the conventional wire-frame computer diagrams, this sophisticated system allows use of three-dimensional images with a full and accurate representation of solid surfaces. Components and subsystems that formerly had to be executed in time-consuming clay or wood are now rendered on the computer and even tested for strength and fitment with surrounding structures. This allows engineers to compress development time and quickly intercept inaccuracies. Even the Cirrus’ supplier companies tapped into the program’s master database when maturing tools, dies, and assemblies. By first “operating” production machinery in the computer, the complex actions and mechanisms of assembly robots can be purged of any glitches before the first day of work in the manufacturing plant. “Everyone’s in the loop and no one has to wait weeks for a design change,” Fieramosca said. “We don’t generate drawings, just on-screen images.” Thus, the time and expense needed to produce Cirrus tooling was cut nearly in half.

What It Is
The Chrysler Cirrus is a five-passenger, four-door family sedan. The base model is the LX; the uplevel choice is called LXi. Both versions are powered by a new 2.5-liter SOHC V-6 engine, mated to an electronically controlled four-speed automatic and driving the front-wheels.

Dual airbags, plus side-impact protection, are standard. Anti-lock brakes, air conditioning, power windows and door locks, cruise control, and a remote keyless entry system also top the list of no-extra-cost items. A rear child safety seat, eight-speaker sound system with CD player, and a “smoker’s package” (an ashtray and cigarette lighter) are among the few items on the abbreviated list of options.

Added benefits of the LXi model are its standard anti-theft alarm, higher-zoot AM/FM/cassette sound system, front seatback map pockets, and 15×6.0-inch cast aluminum wheels (the LX receives the same-size steel wheels and covers).

Regardless of whether you choose the LX or LXi, you’re getting an exceptionally well-equipped vehicle. The base price of the LX is $17,435, while the higher-content LXi commands a $19,365 starting fee.

Look At It 
From its distinctive cab-forward profile and the 63-degree rake of the windshield to the prominent waterfall grille and tasteful decklid metal shaping, the Chrysler Cirrus embodies a dramatic departure from the stoically conventional styling of too many other cars in the small family-sedan class. More than just attractive, the Cirrus also delivers a solid helping of comfort, convenience, utility, and value.

Numerous hours in the wind tunnel resulted in a sleek aerodynamic shape that boasts an impressive 0.31 Cd. In addition to helping eke each last mile from a gallon of fossil fuel, such an effective atmosphere-slicing countenance results in ultra-low wind noise at highway speeds.

By pushing the wheels out toward the four corners of the body, the JA-platform engineers produced generous interior living space for a car of this modest exterior size. Riding on a 108.0-inch wheelbase and measuring 186.0 inches from stem-to-stern, the Cirrus delivers an additional 1.4 inches of wheelbase and 2.1 inches greater overall length than the new Ford Contour.

Step Inside
When it comes time to load ‘er up with family members and head out on vacation, the Cirrus won’t disappoint: It holds proud claim to best-in-class roominess. This comfort is one of the advantages that pushed the Cirrus ahead of its archrival, the Ford Contour, in our Car of the Year balloting. The Chrysler’s four large doors open wide for easy ingress/egress, and rear-seat riders can stretch out to enjoy legroom measurements 3.5 inches greater than those of the Contour and only 1.0 inch less than that of the Intrepid, which is rated by the EPA as a large car.

Bring along the picnic baskets, fishing gear, and lounge chairs, as well. The Cirrus’ trunk can swallow as much as to 15.7 cubic feet of paraphernalia. Or merely flip down the folding rear seatback and pack in the tent poles. The pass-through panel to the trunk is lockable, and there’s an optional cargo net to keep your packages from rolling around.

From the driver’s seat, the cab-forward design imparts an expansive roominess to the interior and lets you monitor the car’s front fenders easily during parking maneuvers. A simple, attractive instrument panel houses a straightforward assortment of gauges, with a large 120-mph speedometer in the center, a 7000-rpm tach to its left, and smaller fuel-level and coolant-temperature dials to the right. The airbag-equipped steering wheel is thick-rimmed for comfort and mounted with the cruise-control switches.

Up front, you’ll find height-adjustable shoulder-belt anchors and a driver’s footrest. The radio and climate controls are housed in the center of the instrument panel, within easy reach of both the driver and front passenger. Large rotary knobs for the climate system allow the driver to adjust air temperature or flow direction without taking his eyes off the road. Twin cup/juicebox holders are formed into the leading edge of the center console, and there’s a small covered console storage bin to hold CD cases and the like. Steering-column stalks are used to control headlights and windshield wipers, the latter of which includes a feature that regulates the cycle time of the wipers according to vehicle speed. Power window and doorlock controls are located on the front door panels and are canted so they can be operated without wacky wrist contortions.

To accommodate five passengers, the Cirrus is outfitted with front buckets and a rear bench seat. The seats come standard covered with quality cloth and vinyl in the LX, and leather and vinyl in the LXi. The front perches have adjustable lumbar supports, but several of our editors felt that the seats were too soft and lacked the necessary side bolstering for gravel-flyin’ cornering maneuvers. Given the Cirrus’ target market of family drivers, however, the seat design should meet most expectations.

Drive It
Twist the ignition key and head for the highway. The transverse-mounted 2.5-liter SOHC 60-degree V-6 is similar to the tried-and-true 3.0-liter V-6 used in Chrysler’s minivans, but it features a reduced bore for less displacement and improved fuel economy. New cylinder heads bring four valves per cylinder (versus two in the 3.0-liter) for better high-rpm breathing. Output is rated at 164 horsepower at 5900 rpm and 163 pound-feet of torque at 4350 rpm, with 90 percent of that torque available between 1900 and 5850 rpm. With a 6250-rpm redline, this Mitsubishi-built engine is a willing revver, but delivers a steadily increasing noise and vibration level with each hash mark on the tach. At normal operating rpm, however, the six is quiet and subdued. Chrysler has developed its own 2.4-liter 140-horse DOHC four-cylinder powerplant for use in the Cirrus’ sister JA-car, the Dodge Stratus, but it’s yet undetermined if any of those engines will find their way into the Cirrus LX for ’95.

Much attention was paid to underhood details, making it easy to check such maintenance items as oil, coolant, and windshield-washer-fluid levels. The battery is housed inside the front inner fender for protection against engine heat and the elements and is accessible via a removable panel. An underhood 12-volt power point provides terminals for jump-starting.

With 0-60-mph times of 9.8 seconds and quarter-mile runs of 17.2 seconds at 81.5 mph, all-out tire-blazing performance obviously isn’t the Cirrus’ main calling. Nonetheless, with the engine’s ample low-rpm torque, it moves smartly away from stoplights, and powers up freeway ramps eagerly at half-throttle. The 41TE electronically controlled four-speed overdrive automatic is touted by Chrysler as being “probably the most sophisticated system in the car,” and features an adaptive memory function that “learns” your driving style and tailors the shift schedule accordingly.

Outfitted with unequal-length upper and lower control arms, coil springs, and anti-roll bars, both Cirrus models deliver more refined ride and handling demeanors than those offered by their MacPherson-strut-wielding competition. The Cirrus’ A-arm setup also provides better wheel control (particularly over rough surfaces), which translates into more of a “driver’s car” feel in virtually all situations.

Speed-sensitive variable-assist power rack-and-pinion steering is standard equipment and responds nicely in handling maneuvers, but was deemed by our drivers to be a bit numb on-center. At the test track, with a 62.6-mph average speed through our 600-foot slalom course and 0.81 g of lateral grip on the skidpad, the Cirrus LXi outpaced the LX (which wears the same 195/65HR15 Michelin MX4 radials, but has less aggressive suspension tuning) by only a slight margin.

Braking performance is enhanced by a standard anti-lock system, which utilizes 11.0-inch-diameter front discs and 7.9-inch rear drums. Frankly, we believe a vehicle of this level of refinement should have rear discs available as an option, or preferably, as standard equipment. Regardless, stopping distance from 60 mph was a respectable 128 feet.

The Bottom line
Can Chrysler Division convert import buyers and shed its stodgy image? Only time will tell.

From its aggressive face and “nouveau-vintage” Chrysler badge to its large and comfortable interior, the Cirrus best demonstrates what a domestic family sedan should be. Boasting a smart design philosophy, safety-conscious engineering, excellent driving dynamics, and a luxurious outlay of standard features, the Cirrus holds a decisive advantage over anything else in its price range.

We chose the Chrysler Cirrus as our 1995 Car of the Year simply because Cirrus takes on the best in class, the Accord, Contour, and Altima and delivers more of what today’s sedan buyers are looking for.
